Add additional documentation around discovery and OpenAPI (#43983)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api.md

Author: Fixed

The Kubernetes API lets you query and manipulate the state of API objects in Kubernetes
(for example: Pods, Namespaces, ConfigMaps, and Events).

Most operations can be performed through the [kubectl](/docs/reference/kubectl/)
command-line interface or other command-line tools, such as
[kubeadm](/docs/reference/setup-tools/kubeadm/), which in turn use the API.
However, you can also access the API directly using REST calls. Kubernetes
provides a set of [client
libraries](/docs/reference/using-api/client-libraries/) for those looking to
write applications using the Kubernetes API. 

> Kubernetes offers two "machine readable" APIs for listing all other Kubernetes

Reviewer: nit: Do you need the words "machine readable"? Are the APIs REST or gRPC?

APIs. Both are valuable tools for developers who are building client libraries,
tooling, IDE features, documentation, and other tools interacting with

> Kubernetes.

Author: committed

> [Discovery](#discovery-api) is an API that provides information about available API names,

Reviewer: Is this correct:
The Discovery API provides information about the available Kubernetes APIs: API names, resources, versions, and supported operations.

nit, Can you clarify this sentence:
This is a Kubernetes specific term.

resources, versions, and operations supported. This is a Kubernetes specific term. It is intended to be a small
document providing a summary of available resources and does not detail specific
schema for the resources. For reference around schemas for resources, please
refer to the OpenAPI document.

> The [OpenAPI]{#openapi-specification} provides full [OpenAPI v2.0 and 3.0 schemas](https://www.openapis.org/) for all Kubernetes API

Reviewer: The Kubernetes OpenAPI document

endpoints. OpenAPI v3 is the preferred method for accessing OpenAPI as it
provides a more comprehensive and accurate view of the API. It includes all
available API paths, as well as all resources consumed and produced for every
operation on every endpoint. This also includes any extensibility components

> that a cluster supports. This document is significantly larger than Discovery,

Reviewer: The Kubernetes OpenAPI document is significantly (is it comprehensive or complete) larger than the Discovery API.
The Discovery API is a lightweight alternative that provides a subset of information in the Kubernetes OpenAPI document.

Kubernetes publishes a list of all group versions and resources supported via
the Discovery API. This includes the following for each resource:

- Name
- Cluster or Namespace scope
- Endpoint URL and supported verbs
- Alternative names
- Group, version, kind

The API is available both aggregated and unaggregated form. The aggregated
discovery serves two endpoints while the unaggregated discovery serves a
separate endpoint for each group version.

### Aggregated Discovery

{{< feature-state state="beta"  for_k8s_version="v1.27" >}}

Kubernetes offers beta support for aggregated discovery, publishing
all resources supported by a cluster through two endpoints (`/api` and
`/apis`). Requesting this
endpoint drastically reduces the number of requests sent to fetch the
discovery for the average Kubernetes cluster. This may be accessed by
requesting the respective endpoints with an Accept header indicating
the aggregated discovery resource:
`Accept: application/json;v=v2beta1;g=apidiscovery.k8s.io;as=APIGroupDiscoveryList`.

Without the Accept header resource type explicitly indicated, the default
response for the `/api` and `/apis` endpoint is an unaggregated discovery
document.

> The [discovery document](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/api/discovery/aggregated_v2beta1.json) serving built-in resources can be found in the Kubernetes Github repository.

Reviewer: nit: is found

Author: Updated and added: `This Github document can be used as a reference of the base set of available resources if a Kubernetes cluster is not available to query.`

The endpoint also supports ETag and protobuf encoding.

> ### Unaggregated Discovery

Author: Why lowercase? I think referring to the API as proper noun (Discovery API) makes sense, so the two forms of the API (aggregated and unaggregated) should still have Discovery capitalized?

> ### Unaggregated Discovery

Reviewer 2: - This will localize better if it's all lowercase. We're explaining the concept of _unaggregated discovery_, even if the API that enables this also contains the string `Discovery`
- It's not exactly a resource kind like ConfigMap or Deployment are; you can't `kubectl get Discovery` and have that do something helpful.
- we write Kubernetes-specific concepts in sentence case, and then italicize them for their first use.
  eg: A _ConfigMap_ is an object that stores values&hellip;
  eg: In Kubernetes, _eviction_ refers to&hellip;

If we were to write something in UpperCamelCase, it could be **APIGroupDiscovery**; however, I don't think that particularly helps either. So, I recommend “discovery” here.

> ### Unaggregated Discovery

Author: Fixed.

endpoints publishing discovery information for downstream documents.

A list of all group versions supported by a cluster is published at
the `/api` and `/apis` endpoints. Example:

```
{
  "kind": "APIGroupList",
  "apiVersion": "v1",
  "groups": [
    {
      "name": "apiregistration.k8s.io",
      "versions": [
        {
          "groupVersion": "apiregistration.k8s.io/v1",
          "version": "v1"
        }
      ],
      "preferredVersion": {
        "groupVersion": "apiregistration.k8s.io/v1",
        "version": "v1"
      }
    },
    {
      "name": "apps",
      "versions": [
        {
          "groupVersion": "apps/v1",
          "version": "v1"
        }
      ],
      "preferredVersion": {
        "groupVersion": "apps/v1",
        "version": "v1"
      }
    },
    ...
}
```

Additional requests are needed to obtain the discovery document for each group version at
`/apis/<group>/<version>` (for example:
`/apis/rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1alpha1`), which advertises the list of
resources served under a particular group version. These endpoints are used by
kubectl to fetch the list of resources supported by a cluster.

<!-- body -->

## OpenAPI Specification

> For details on the specification of the OpenAPI format, refer to the [OpenAPI documentation](https://www.openapis.org/).

Reviewer: nit: For details about the OpenAPI specifications, see the ...

> Kubernetes serves both OpenAPI v2.0 and OpenAPI v3.0. OpenAPI V3 is the

Reviewer: nit: v3 or V3?

Author: Fixed to both lowercase v

The Kubernetes API lets you query and manipulate the state of API objects in Kubernetes
(for example: Pods, Namespaces, ConfigMaps, and Events).

Most operations can be performed through the [kubectl](/docs/reference/kubectl/)
command-line interface or other command-line tools, such as

> [kubeadm](/docs/reference/setup-tools/kubeadm/), which in turn use the API.

Reviewer 3: Would it be useful to show any of the kubectl operations? api-resources maybe?

Author: It feels a bit weird to directly talk about api-resources in a section that introduces both discovery and OpenAPI. I added a note around api-resources in the discovery section.

Reviewer 3: OK. On my first pass reading this I was wondering why kubectl was being discussed which prompted my question.  If we don't want to get into kubectl here, maybe don't bring it up?

Author: Giving examples of clients that use the API without going into the specifics. I removed the api-resources part, but I think it's still useful to link to clients like kubectl, kubeadm, etc?

However, you can also access the API directly using REST calls. Kubernetes
provides a set of [client
libraries](/docs/reference/using-api/client-libraries/) for those looking to
write applications using the Kubernetes API.

Each Kubernetes offers publishes a machine-readable description of the APIs that the cluster serves.
There are two mechanisms that Kubernetes uses to publish these API descriptions; each is useful
to enable automatic interoperability. For example, the `kubectl` tool fetches and caches the API
description and uses this to enable command-line completion and other features.
Here is some more detail about each of those two mechanisms:

> [The Discovery API](#discovery-api) provides information about the Kubernetes APIs: API names,
> resources, versions, and supported operations. This is a Kubernetes specific term as it is a separate API from the Kubernetes OpenAPI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[The Discovery API](#discovery-api) provides information about the Kubernetes APIs: API names,
resources, versions, and supported operations. This is a Kubernetes specific API that provides a more concise listing of available APIs than the Kubernetes OpenAPI endpoints.
```

?

Maybe link to OpenAPI?

It is intended to be a small document providing a summary of available resources
and does not detail specific schema for the resources. For reference around schemas
for resources, please refer to the OpenAPI document.

> The [Kubernetes OpenAPI Document]{#openapi-specification} provides (full) [OpenAPI v2.0 and 3.0 schemas](https://www.openapis.org/) for all Kubernetes API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [Kubernetes OpenAPI Document]{#openapi-specification} provides [OpenAPI v2.0 and 3.0 schemas](https://www.openapis.org/) for all Kubernetes API
```

It wasn't clear to me what (full) meant here. Maybe just drop it?

endpoints. OpenAPI v3 is the preferred method for accessing OpenAPI as it
provides a more comprehensive and accurate view of the API. It includes all
available API paths, as well as all resources consumed and produced for every
operation on every endpoint. This also includes any extensibility components
that a cluster supports. This document a complete document and is significantly larger than Discovery. The Discovery API is a
lightweight alternative that provides a subset of information in the
Kubernetes OpenAPI document.

## Discovery API

Kubernetes publishes a list of all group versions and resources supported via
the Discovery API. This includes the following for each resource:

- Name

> - Cluster or Namespace scope

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Cluster or namespaced scope
```

- Endpoint URL and supported verbs
- Alternative names
- Group, version, kind

The API is available both aggregated and unaggregated form. The aggregated
discovery serves two endpoints while the unaggregated discovery serves a
separate endpoint for each group version.

### Aggregated Discovery

> {{< feature-state state="beta"  for_k8s_version="v1.27" >}}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{< feature-state state="beta" for_k8s_version="v1.27" >}}
```

Kubernetes offers beta support for aggregated discovery, publishing
all resources supported by a cluster through two endpoints (`/api` and
`/apis`). Requesting this
endpoint drastically reduces the number of requests sent to fetch the

> discovery for the average Kubernetes cluster. This may be accessed by

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
discovery data from the cluster. You can access the data by
```

requesting the respective endpoints with an Accept header indicating
the aggregated discovery resource:
`Accept: application/json;v=v2beta1;g=apidiscovery.k8s.io;as=APIGroupDiscoveryList`.

Without the Accept header resource type explicitly indicated, the default
response for the `/api` and `/apis` endpoint is an unaggregated discovery
document.

> The [discovery document](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-v{{< skew currentVersion >}}/api/discovery/aggregated_v2beta1.json) serving built-in resources is found in the Kubernetes Github repository. This Github document can be used as a reference of the base set of available resources if a Kubernetes cluster is not available to query.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The [discovery document](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-v{{< skew currentVersion >}}/api/discovery/aggregated_v2beta1.json)
for the built-in resources can be found in the Kubernetes GitHub repository.
This Github document can be used as a reference of the base set of the available resources
if a Kubernetes cluster is not available to query.
```

The endpoint also supports ETag and protobuf encoding.

> ### Unaggregated discovery

Reviewer 3: nit: Instead of "Unaggregated" how about "Navigable discovery" or something?

Author: I slightly prefer aggregated because throughout this entire doc (and codebase) we've been referring to "aggregated discovery" and "unaggregated discovery". Navigable discovery feels like it could be a new orthogonal feature and I'd prefer to avoid that ambiguity.

        "version": "v1"
      }
    },
    {
      "name": "apps",
      "versions": [
        {
          "groupVersion": "apps/v1",
          "version": "v1"
        }
      ],
      "preferredVersion": {
        "groupVersion": "apps/v1",
        "version": "v1"
      }
    },
    ...
}
```

Additional requests are needed to obtain the discovery document for each group version at
`/apis/<group>/<version>` (for example:
`/apis/rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1alpha1`), which advertises the list of
resources served under a particular group version. These endpoints are used by
kubectl to fetch the list of resources supported by a cluster.

<!-- body -->

## OpenAPI Specification

For details about the OpenAPI specifications, see the [OpenAPI documentation](https://www.openapis.org/).

Kubernetes serves both OpenAPI v2.0 and OpenAPI v3.0. OpenAPI v3 is the
preferred method of accessing the OpenAPI because it offers a more comprehensive
(lossless) representation of Kubernetes resources. Due to limitations of OpenAPI
version 2, certain fields are dropped from the published OpenAPI including but not
limited to `default`, `nullable`, `oneOf`.

> ### OpenAPI V2

Author: Fixed

  please refer to the OpenAPI document.

- The [Kubernetes OpenAPI Document](#openapi-specification) provides (full)
  [OpenAPI v2.0 and 3.0 schemas](https://www.openapis.org/) for all Kubernetes API
endpoints.
  The OpenAPI v3 is the preferred method for accessing OpenAPI as it
provides
  a more comprehensive and accurate view of the API. It includes all the available
  API paths, as well as all resources consumed and produced for every operations
  on every endpoints. It also includes any extensibility components that a cluster supports.
  The data is a complete specification and is significantly larger than that from the
  Discovery API.

## Discovery API

Kubernetes publishes a list of all group versions and resources supported via
the Discovery API. This includes the following for each resource:

- Name
- Cluster or namespaced scope
- Endpoint URL and supported verbs
- Alternative names
- Group, version, kind

The API is available both aggregated and unaggregated form. The aggregated
discovery serves two endpoints while the unaggregated discovery serves a
separate endpoint for each group version.

> ### Aggregated Discovery

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
### Aggregated discovery
```

endpoints publishing discovery information for downstream documents.

A list of all group versions supported by a cluster is published at
the `/api` and `/apis` endpoints. Example:

```
{
  "kind": "APIGroupList",
  "apiVersion": "v1",
  "groups": [
    {
      "name": "apiregistration.k8s.io",
      "versions": [
        {
          "groupVersion": "apiregistration.k8s.io/v1",
          "version": "v1"
        }
      ],
      "preferredVersion": {
        "groupVersion": "apiregistration.k8s.io/v1",
        "version": "v1"
      }
    },
    {
      "name": "apps",
      "versions": [
        {
          "groupVersion": "apps/v1",
          "version": "v1"
        }
      ],
      "preferredVersion": {
        "groupVersion": "apps/v1",
        "version": "v1"
      }
    },
    ...
}
```

Additional requests are needed to obtain the discovery document for each group version at
`/apis/<group>/<version>` (for example:
`/apis/rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1alpha1`), which advertises the list of
resources served under a particular group version. These endpoints are used by
kubectl to fetch the list of resources supported by a cluster.

<!-- body -->

> ## OpenAPI Specification

Reviewer 2: Please retain the existing fragment ID. How about this:
```suggestion
<a id="#api-specification" />

## OpenAPI interface definition
```
? I know that it's slightly tautological but in this sense OpenAPI is a proper noun.

---

If there are existing bookmarks, we like to keep those working. Also I'd prefer to follow our style guide for headings (we use sentence case)

The Kubernetes API lets you query and manipulate the state of API objects in Kubernetes
(for example: Pods, Namespaces, ConfigMaps, and Events).

Most operations can be performed through the [kubectl](/docs/reference/kubectl/)
command-line interface or other command-line tools, such as
[kubeadm](/docs/reference/setup-tools/kubeadm/), which in turn use the API.
However, you can also access the API directly using REST calls. Kubernetes
provides a set of [client
libraries](/docs/reference/using-api/client-libraries/) for those looking to
write applications using the Kubernetes API. 

Kubernetes offers two "machine readable" APIs for listing all other Kubernetes
APIs. Both are valuable tools for developers who are building client libraries,
tooling, IDE features, documentation, and other tools interacting with
Kubernetes.

> Discovery is an API that provides information about available API names,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Discovery](#discovery-api) is an API that provides information about available API names,
```

Reviewer 5: I would also mention that this is a kubernetes thing that doesn't exist somewhere else. That term is used by many different systems and can cause confusion.

resources, versions, and operations supported. It is intended to be a small
document providing a summary of available resources and does not detail specific
schema for the resources. For reference around schemas for resources, please
refer to the OpenAPI document.

> The OpenAPI provides full OpenAPI v2.0 and 3.0 schemas for all Kubernetes API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenAPI provides full [OpenAPI](https://www.openapis.org/) v2.0 and 3.0 schemas for all Kubernetes API
```

The API is available both aggregated and unaggregated form. The aggregated
discovery serves two endpoints while the unaggregated discovery serves a
separate endpoint for each group version.

### Aggregated Discovery

{{< feature-state state="beta"  for_k8s_version="v1.27" >}}

Kubernetes offers beta support for aggregated discovery, publishing
all resources supported by a cluster through two endpoints (`/api` and
`/apis`). Requesting this
endpoint drastically reduces the number of requests sent to fetch the
discovery for the average Kubernetes cluster. This may be accessed by
requesting the respective endpoints with an Accept header indicating
the aggregated discovery resource:
`Accept: application/json;v=v2beta1;g=apidiscovery.k8s.io;as=APIGroupDiscoveryList`.

Without the Accept header resource type explicitly indicated, the default
response for the `/api` and `/apis` endpoint is an unaggregated discovery
document.

The [discovery document](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/api/discovery/aggregated_v2beta1.json) serving built-in resources can be found in the Kubernetes Github repository.

The endpoint also supports ETag and protobuf encoding.

> ## Unaggregated Discovery

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Unaggregated Discovery
```
Does that seem right?

endpoints publishing discovery information for downstream documents.

A list of all group versions supported by a cluster is published at
the `/api` and `/apis` endpoints. Example:

```
{
  "kind": "APIGroupList",
  "apiVersion": "v1",
  "groups": [
    {
      "name": "apiregistration.k8s.io",
      "versions": [
        {
          "groupVersion": "apiregistration.k8s.io/v1",
          "version": "v1"
        }
      ],
      "preferredVersion": {
        "groupVersion": "apiregistration.k8s.io/v1",
        "version": "v1"
      }
    },
    {
      "name": "apps",
      "versions": [
        {
          "groupVersion": "apps/v1",
          "version": "v1"
        }
      ],
      "preferredVersion": {
        "groupVersion": "apps/v1",
        "version": "v1"
      }
    },
    ...
}
```

Additional requests are needed to obtain the discovery document for each group version at
`/apis/<group>/<version>` (for example:
`/apis/rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1alpha1`), which advertises the list of
resources served under a particular group version. These endpoints are used by
kubectl to fetch the list of resources supported by a cluster.

<!-- body -->

> ## OpenAPI specification {#api-specification}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## OpenAPI specification {#openapi}
```
The first mention of OpenAPI could then link here, if you want.

For details on the specification of the OpenAPI format, refer to the [OpenAPI documentation](https://www.openapis.org/).

> Kubernetes serves both OpenAPI V2.0 and OpenAPI V3.0. OpenAPI V3 is the

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
Kubernetes serves both OpenAPI v2.0 and OpenAPI v3.0. OpenAPI 3 is the
```

preferred method of accessing the OpenAPI because it offers a more comprehensive
(lossless) representation of Kubernetes resources. Due to limitations of OpenAPI

> V2, certain fields are dropped from the published OpenAPI including but not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
version 2, certain fields are dropped from the published OpenAPI including but not
```

> limited to `default`, `nullable`, `oneOf`. At the moment, Kubernetes publishes
> OpenAPI V3.0, and there are no plans to support 3.1 in the near future.

Reviewer 2: We [avoid statements about the future](/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-statements-about-the-future).
I'd try this
```suggestion
limited to `default`, `nullable`, `oneOf`. Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}}
publishes OpenAPI v2.0 and v3.0; there are no plans to support 3.1 in the near future.
```

We might want to move this statement under the v3 heading, rather than here.

  </tbody>
</table>

> A Golang implementation to fetch the OpenAPI V3 is provided in the package [`k8s.io/client-go/openapi3`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/openapi3).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A Golang implementation to fetch the OpenAPI V3 is provided in the package
[`k8s.io/client-go/openapi3`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/client-go/openapi3).
```

>  Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}} publishes

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}} publishes
```

OpenAPI v2.0 and v3.0; there are no plans to support 3.1 in the near future.

### Protobuf serialization

Kubernetes implements an alternative Protobuf based serialization format that
is primarily intended for intra-cluster communication. For more information

> about this format, see the [Kubernetes Protobuf serialization](https://git.k8s.io/design-proposals-archive/api-machinery/protobuf.md) design proposal and the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
about this format, see the [Kubernetes Protobuf serialization](https://git.k8s.io/design-proposals-archive/api-machinery/protobuf.md)
design proposal and the
```
